What is a hash function.
It's something that's used all across computer science a hash function is simply a function that generates
a value of fixed length for each input that it gets.
All right.
What does that mean.
Well I have here a empty five hash generated empty five is the type of hash function.
And there's many many types you might have heard of SHA 1 shot 256 and many others using this hash function.
LET'S SEE WHAT HAPPENS IF I DO.
HELLO.
YOU SEE THAT RIGHT AWAY.
AND THESE FIVE HASHES this string and turns it into this gibberish that's what a hash function does.
We give it an input and the function generates some random pattern.
Now there's some key aspects of hash functions.
First is that it's one way in the sense that if I give somebody this they have no idea what the input
was.
And it's practically impossible for me to have any clue as to what the input is.
The second is that no matter how many times I put Hello in there it's going to be the same.
But I soon as I change one thing it's going to completely change the output.
If I go back to hello and watch me just change to capital H even a capital letter.
So it starts with five D four.
If I do capital H it's completely different.
Again and looking at this we can at least say that.
Mm hmm.
I don't know what this is useful for but the one thing that I know is that no matter what if I give
it the same input it's going to give me the same result but I have no idea how to convert this back
into Hello.
This is what we call indent potent or indent potent.
There's different pronunciations.
I'm not really sure which ones which but it is a fancy way of saying that a function given an input
always outputs the same output.
Now the one benefit and why we would want to use this in a data structure is that we get really fast
dad access because all I have to do to find grapes or basket dot grapes is to pass grapes into something
like an empty five hash it generates this number for me and I immediately know where it is in my memory
on our computer but this doesn't look like an address.
Does it technically a hash function that we use for hash tables is going to take grapes generate some
sort of gibberish and then converted to an index space or an address space that it has based on this
number.
You see unlike a race where we just had ordered indexes with hash tables all we need to do is give it
a key and we know exactly where that item is in our memory but you might be wondering this black box
hash function doesn't it slow things down.
Because every time we want to add a prop. And a value grapes and ten thousand two hash table we have
to run it through the hash function so we can decide where to put it in memory.
And if you've noticed that.
Good job.
That is a big factor.
You don't want this to take a very long time because well every time you add a property to memory or
retrieve a property to memory because again we add both times we're sending the key grapes into the
hash function to find where to get it from.
We need this to be really really fast.
And underneath the hood remember because hash tables exist in all languages they're implemented with
an optimum hashing function that's really really fast.
As a side note hash functions like SHA 256 take a really long time to generate a hash and it is an overly
complex hashing function that is used a lot in places like cryptography where you want this to take
longer but that is outside the scope of this course.
If you're interested I do recommend that you check out the differences between these two to review.
We have a key that is grapes.
We send it through a hash function that is going to hash something really really fast and then map whatever
the hash came out to be into a memory address where we want to store our data our grapes 10000 and when
it comes to hashing functions you typically leave this to whatever framework or language you're using
and we usually assume a time complexity or Big O notation of 0 1 because this happens really fast.
All right.
Now that we understand what this black box does.
Let's talk a little bit more about hash tables why they're useful and why in some cases are better than
arrays.